---
layout: page-with-side-image
title: "Application Lifecycle Management"
date: 2021-02-11T05:59:24-07:00
imageDescription: "Large icon with Visual Studio logo"
imageUrl: "/services/img/icon-application-lifecycle-management-347x346.jpg"
---

Application Lifecycle Management (ALM) is a continuous process involving all
aspects of software development -- including gathering business and technical
requirements, planning and architecture, implementation, testing, project
tracking, change management, and release management.

In the past, creating and managing software solutions required teams to use a
variety of tools and processes that were often loosely integrated or, worse,
completely disconnected from each other. For example, testers often tracked bugs
and issues using Excel spreadsheets or a simple Web application, and developers
would subsequently reference these sources in order to resolve them.

Using a multitude of tools and processes -- within and across roles --
inherently impedes a software project. The velocity of the team is significantly
reduced due to a variety of factors. For example, team members often perform
non-value added activities like manually extracting and aggregating data from
various sources in order to communicate project status to management.

Implementing an effective ALM solution removes inefficiencies in the development
process and substantially reduces the complexity and risks in delivering
technology solutions. By increasing team collaboration and productivity,
application lifecycle management dramatically improves project success rates and
helps avoid unexpected costs due to schedule overruns, poor software quality,
and lack of effective change management.

## Team Foundation Server

Team Foundation Server (TFS) is Microsoft's core platform for application
lifecycle management. It provides fundamental services such as work item
tracking, version control, and build automation. TFS includes dashboards and
flexible reporting capabilities that provide visibility into the overall project
health, while promoting greater transparency regarding potential problems.

However, while making the decision to adopt TFS is a great first step, it does
not immediately enable your organization to realize the full potential of
application lifecycle management.

Technology Toolbox provides a variety of offerings to help your plan, deploy,
and optimize Team Foundation Server:

- Assessment
- TFS Pilot
- Workshops

## Assessment

We recommend starting with an assessment of your current processes and tools in
order to provide a roadmap for successfully migrating or upgrading to Team
Foundation Server 2010. By first understanding the maturity of your software
development organization, we can identify the "low hanging fruit" for improving
the predictability and success of your software projects in the short term,
while also providing recommendations for improving efficiency over the longer
term.

## Team Foundation Server Pilot

Regardless of whether you are upgrading from a previous version of TFS or
migrating from a different toolset, we recommend installing TFS 2010 in a lab
environment to understand the various capabilities and gain valuable hands-on
experience using real world scenarios.

For example, using a lab environment, we can show you how to quickly implement
an automated daily build and deployment process -- or continuous integration, if
you prefer -- that incorporates best practices like incrementing assembly
versions with each build. A lab environment is also ideal for understanding and
evaluating different branching strategies and other aspects of source control
management.

Once you are ready for a production deployment, we can help you migrate a real
project in order to verify the solution and document the governance of your TFS
deployment going forward.

## Workshops

If you already have TFS installed, Technology Toolbox can deliver a variety of
workshops to increase your knowledge of specific ALM techniques. For example,
your team may be looking for ways to work more effectively in parallel on
multiple versions of your solution (in other words, creating new features and
enhancements for vNext while also implementing hotfixes for the current
release). We provide focused two-day workshops that cover this scenario and many
others.
