---
title: "Sharepoint Architecture and Development"
date: 2021-02-11T09:03:30-07:00
draft: true
---

Microsoft .NET was revolutionary in the world of software development. In much
the same way, SharePoint has radically changed the way we build and deploy
solutions to rapidly address changing business needs. However, delivering
business solutions based on SharePoint is fundamentally different from using the
core .NET Framework.

For the people making the business decision to fund a project, technology isn't
about service oriented architecture, protocols, Web services, or patterns.

It's about value...business value.

It's about how quickly you can turn a set of requirements into a functional
solution that _just works_...and easily grows to meet the needs of the business
-- in terms of raw performance and scalability as well as addressing new or
changing business scenarios -- all while minimizing immediate and long term
costs.

Delivering business value in ever shorter timeframes requires a fundamental
shift in your approach. Starting with a more powerful, unified infrastructure
like SharePoint 2010 is an essential first step, but that alone is not enough.

You have to switch the focus from writing large amounts of custom code to
instead leveraging out-of-the-box capabilities in the product. In other words,
you have to spend much more time _planning_ and less time _building_.

However, every business is different and there will always be some level of
customization required, even if it is simply a matter of minimal branding to
adhere to your company standards.

We can help you plan, customize, and deploy SharePoint 2010 to address your
specific needs, whether you are upgrading from a previous version or migrating
from another platform.

## SharePoint Architecture

Technology Toolbox helps you maximize the business value from your SharePoint
investment by planning a robust infrastructure for an end-to-end Web platform
that grows with your needs. For example, your immediate requirements may be
limited to core Enterprise Content Management capabilities, such as storing
documents or publishing Web content, as well as replacing a legacy search engine
to index and locate information. After you have addressed these initial
scenarios, you anticipate rolling out additional collaboration capabilities such
as team sites and My Sites.

We can assist in developing a strategic blueprint for an enterprise-wide
SharePoint deployment. A key deliverable of this effort is a roadmap explaining
how your SharePoint platform is expected to evolve over time to support
additional workloads.

For businesses who have already deployed Microsoft Office SharePoint Server
2007, we can provide similar assistance to create a migration plan for upgrading
to SharePoint 2010.

## SharePoint Development

If you already have SharePoint deployed in your enterprise and are looking for
assistance building custom applications and components specific to your
business, Technology Toolbox has extensive experience to help you complete this
effort quickly and effectively.

We focus on creating flexible solutions -- with minimal custom code -- that
incorporate best practices for both SharePoint and .NET development.

Technology Toolbox also has proven expertise in migrating large amounts of
content from legacy platforms to SharePoint. Whether you are looking to migrate
a corpus comprised of tens of thousands of documents stored on various file
servers, or a large Internet site based on a legacy content management system,
we can help expedite your move to SharePoint.
